The patient is from the South Bronx, one of the poorest communities in New York City. One study found that “the mortality rate due to diabetes for women ages 18 to 64 is twenty times higher than in the predominantly White Upper East Side of Manhattan, a ten-minute subway ride away” (cite). The common occurrence of obesity and diabetes is not just the result of individual choices, but it is also the result of unhealthy social and environmental conditions. For example, lack of access to healthy foods is correlated with obesity (cite). And, the lack of healthy food options, especially in the South Bronx, have led to high prevalence rates of obesity in the region (cite).

Another notable theme in terms of social determinants of health is the lack of trust in medical practitioners. A study in the Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved utilized focus groups to determine that residents felt that they received second-class care and felt routinely disrespected by the medical system (cite). This decreases the likelihood that residents will seek out medical care and attend checkups, which is critical for finding out risk factors for diseases such as diabetes. Additionally, if prediabetic conditions are discovered, lifestyle changes are often recommended. However, these recommendations such as eating healthier and exercising more could be unattainable when there is a lack of access to food education, healthy foods, and spaces to exercise.

The important thing to note is that these are all factors that extend beyond direct medical care and intervention. No amount of prescriptions or surgery can prevent the root causes of diabetes. Instead, it is crucial to examine how social determinants such as access to supermarkets, education, and urban planning play a role in the health of citizens.
